---
title: JavaScript is not so bad as everyone said
excerpt: >-
  I hear how developers from unique ecosystems, which are writing in Python,
  C++, Java and other programming languages, say that JavaScript is crap. This
  bothered me for a while, so, at some point, I wrote this article to share my
  thoughts with you about JavaScript and it’s bad and, maybe, good parts.
categories:
  - Thoughts
tags:
  - javascript
header:
  overlay_image: assets/uploads/2017-01-03/scream.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.5
  caption: Photo by Ryan Snaadt on Unsplash
  teaser: assets/uploads/2017-01-03/scream.jpg
---

## Boring part of the article

If you’re following me up on a Medium, you have noticed a few articles I wrote
about Node.js and its internals. If not, here are some of them: [How does
Node.js work]({% post_url 2015-08-23-how-does-node.js-work %}), [how V8
optimizes JavaScript
code]({% post_url 2016-03-25-how-v8-optimises-javascript-code %}), [optimization
tricks in V8]({% post_url 2016-04-05-optimizations-tricks-in-v8 %}) and [tracing
de-optimizations in
Node.js]({% post_url 2016-05-16-tracing-de-optimizations-in-nodejs %}). Also,
I’m the author of high performance renderer API for a terminal
([terminal-canvas](https://github.com/ghaiklor/terminal-canvas)). Based on
_terminal-canvas_, I’ve created a presentation engine that allows you to create
presentations via shapes/geometry/animations and show them right in your
terminal — [Kittik](https://github.com/ghaiklor/kittik). I have 5+ years of
experience with JavaScript and got through each of stages, starting from
horrible code and finishing with elegant solutions.

## JavaScript is easy to learn

Is that good or bad? Hm... both.

On one hand, you can make a working proof of a concept in a language easy to
learn in a few days. Though, it will be an unmaintainable bulk of code in one
file, without tests, that will make your eyes bleed.

On the other hand, JavaScript is not as easy to learn as everyone thinks. We can
achieve a good knowledge of JavaScript only after years of developing monstrous
applications in different sectors and reading a lot of
documentation/articles/references and specifications about JavaScript itself.

This problem with the learning curve of JavaScript leads to another problem.

## Anyone can write in JavaScript

But most of that code is terrible. I’ve seen a lot of projects, modules,
front-end and back-end applications during my career. Almost all of them are
written awfully. While looking at it, I felt a strong urge to break the arms of
whoever was related to writing that code.

Trainee developers, juniors, students, which are only at the beginning of their
career, are choosing JavaScript as a main language for educational purposes. Or
the company they started to work in choosing the language for them. As a result,
JavaScript becomes a language that anyone can pick up, but it will usually be
inexperienced people.

This leads to another problem.

## Most people associate JavaScript with these inexperienced people

And that’s why, in my humble opinion, everyone says that JavaScript is a piece
of shit. They never get to see the well-written JavaScript code. We can say the
same about Python, C++ and any damn programming language. If code is written
awfully, it’s not important which language was used — the code is awful, not the
language itself.

Let me draw an analogy with another situation. Imagine that you never written in
Python; you don’t have experience with it. Also, you’ve never seen well-written
Python code. So, you don’t have experience and enough knowledge to write a good
maintainable code. You wrote some code, released some project, everything is
working, you’re happy.

Now, I’m as a JavaScript developer and want to switch to Python. And as a main
point of my decision, I looked into your code. Turns out it’s awful. What are my
thoughts? Is Python awful programming language? Is Python a piece of shit? Will
it be better if I stay with JavaScript?

No! Python is not an awful programming language. JavaScript is not an awful
programming language.

## Summary

I have little else to say. I just had to get this off my chest. I’ve had enough
discussions about JavaScript being terrible lately.

People keep talking about languages being bad when they should really focus on
the developers using those languages.

Be smarter, don’t judge by what you saw or heard. Judge by what you and others
do. Thanks for reading!

---

_Eugene Obrezkov, Senior JavaScript developer at
[Dev-Pro](https://www.dev-pro.net), Kharkov, Ukraine._
